INSTALL
=======

What you will need is this:

    * Perl 5.8.0 or higher
    * Gtk+ version 2 or higher
    * The XML::Simple Perl module
    * The XML::Parser Perl module
    * The Gtk2-Perl libraries

Some of the applets also require additional modules, for example:

    * The Gnome2::Wnck Perl module for the tasklist, pager and window
      menu applets
    * Xmms::Remote for the XMMS applet
    * Gnome2::VFS for the SetiAtHome and GnomeMenu applets

Perl and Gtk+ should have been installed with your operating system. If
you don't have Gtk+ 2 or higher, then you might want to try a Gnome
distribution such as Ximian Desktop or Dropline. Alternatively you can
download source code from http://www.gtk.org/.

The XML::Simple is available on CPAN. The Gtk2-Perl and Gnome2::Wnck
libraries can be found on the Sourceforge page at

    http://sourceforge.net/projects/gtk2-perl.

Gnome2::Wnck is the Perl bindings for libwnck, the Window Navigation
Construction Kit. You do not need the Gnome2 libraries in order to use
this module - it has the Gnome2:: prefix because it's maintained by the
GNOME developers.

Note about XML::Simple
======================

By default, XML::Simple will attempt to use XML::SAX as an XML parser.
However we have observed that in some situations this can result in
unreliable conversion of data. So PerlPanel forces the use of
XML::Parser instead of XML::SAX. So even if you have XML::Simple
installed you may find that PerlPanel won't run - this is because
XML::Parser is required.

Installing PerlPanel
====================

Installing PerlPanel is a simple matter of downloading the source
tarball, extracting it, and then running the following commands:

        [user@host]$ make
        [user@host]$ su
        Enter password:
        [root@host]# make install

By default, PerlPanel will install into the /usr/local directory. If you
want to change this, you can either edit the PREFIX variable in the
Makefile, or add 'PREFIX=/path/to/directory' as an argument to make.

PerlPanel is also available in RPM package form. These packages should
work on any operating system that supports the RPM system, for example
Red Hat, Fedora, Mandrake and SuSE. Simply download the NoArch RPM and
run:

        [root@host]# rpm -Uvh PerlPanel-x.y.z-1.noarch.rpm

If you want to build your own RPMs from the source RPM, simply download
the PerlPanel-x.y.x.src.rpm file and run these commands:

        [root@host]# rpm -ivh PerlPanel-x.y.z.src.rpm
        [root@host]# cd /path/to/rpm/directory/SPECS
        [root@host]# rpmbuild -bb PerlPanel-x.y.z.spec --target=noarch
        [root@host]# rpm -Uvh ../RPMS/noarch/PerlPanel-x.y.z-1.noarch.rpm

You can also build an RPM directly from the source tarball, using

        [root@host]# rpmbuild -tb PerlPanel-x.y.z.tar.gz

Users of Debian GNU/Linux can install PerlPanel by running the command

	apt-get install perlpanel

Users of the Gentoo operating system can find ebuilds via the project website.

--
$Id: INSTALL,v 1.4 2004/05/07 14:31:14 jodrell Exp $
